[Music]
foreign Hoffman welcome back to the show
thanks a lot Thomas great to be here
dude excited to have you back so I'm
obsessed with the Matrix and the idea
that we're living in a false reality now
I know you don't believe that we are
actually in a simulation but do we
recognize the truth of reality
well our best science tells us that
space-time is not fundamental this is
the conclusion of both physics and
evolution by natural selection so the
physicists tell us that space-time is
doomed it's not fundamental and they're
finding new structures Beyond space-time
like the amplitudehedron that actually
make the math easier in space-time for
the things they need to do and then
evolution by natural selection also
agrees with the physicist that
space-time is not fundamental let's
explain that so when you say that
space-time isn't fundamental what do we
mean exactly in like the simplest or
we'll get into the geeky like deep stuff
in a second but for the audience that
hasn't heard you talk before right what
does that mean well we tend to think of
space and time as the basic level of
reality
everything that could possibly be is
inside space and has some some time
the Big Bang was the start of it all and
who knows what the end will be maybe a
big crunch or just petering out in low
entropy and low temperature we don't
know yet but that
we think or we thought is the basis of
all reality so space and time are the
the basic stage on which all of reality
plays out
that's the weird thing yeah does that
mean that whatever is real and we should
probably give people your
um headset metaverse explanation which
speaks dear to my heart but before we do
that does that mean that whatever is
real is non-physical
well so the word real is a little
slippery so
um
in some sense my headache is real right
because it's a real experience but
um it real in the sense that the
physicists are talking about it when
they thought that space and time are
fundamental they were thinking that this
was the fundamental ground of all
possible realities
like in a Newtonian universe and even in
Einstein it's a point of view Einstein
thought that space and time was the
grounding reality for everything
and now we realize that
the four dimensions of space-time
or even 10 dimensions of string theory
or something like that is
not going deep enough there are
structures entirely Beyond space-time
and entirely Beyond quantum theory
so so these new structures are not like
little structures sitting inside at the
small scale system they can get the
structures yeah people are going to be
super lost so okay the idea of the
headset I think is a really core concept
so yeah uh somebody asked you once like
in the future we're going to start using
different metaphors what metaphors do
you think we're going to use and you
said the metaverse about somebody trying
to contribute to the metaverse my ears
perked up on that one right why will
that become such a useful metaphor for
for this moment and how we perceive
things right because the way that
evolution
speaks on this is it says that our
perceptions of of objects in space and
time is really just like a virtual
reality headset it's there to help you
play the game of life
without knowing what's on the other side
of the headset what's on the other side
what's the hardware and software that's
running the game you don't have to know
that to play the game and in fact if you
were trying to play a game of like Grand
Theft Auto and virtual reality and you
know you had to toggle millions of
voltages per second to drive your car
uh you would lose when you were you know
competing with someone who could just
turn a nice little simple steering wheel
and press on a artificial gas pedal so
evolution
gave us senses that allow us to survive
by hiding the truth and just telling us
how to act so as The evolutionary
theorists would say our senses guide
adaptive Behavior why does natural
selection as a theory predict that
because I understand the theory I guess
well enough at a high level but I never
would have guessed that it actually says
that it makes a prediction anyway that
you whatever is real the only thing I
can tell you that Evolution has selected
for is not that so where like would uh
uh is this something that Darwin himself
saw in his theory or would he be
surprised I think Darwin would be
surprised and in fact many um
evolutionary theorists today
are surprised and so how do we know this
isn't just a kooky interpretation of
natural selection by Donald Hoffman
exactly so
the
the way we pursue this is it turns out
that Darwin's theory has been turned
into a mathematically precise Theory
it's called evolutionary Game Theory so
John Maynard Smith
started that in the 1970s and so we now
have instead of you know Darwin's theory
which is you know it's imprecise in the
sense that it's not a mathematical model
evolutionary Game Theory evolutionary
graph Theory are mathematically precise
so we can now prove theorems and we can
ask technical questions so what is the
probability
that natural selection
would shape any sensory system of any
organism
to reveal any true structures of
objective reality that's a clean
technical question and it turns out that
evolutionary game theory is precise
enough to address that question okay so
I know I've gotten hung up on that a lot
and I think
for people of my cognitive ability we
will have to accept that as the miracle
of this conversation otherwise we'll
derail on that because I don't
understand how his theory can be turned
into a math equation and I worry that
for you to explain it to me would take
an entire semester and cause me to tear
my hair out but so if we can accept
unless you're thinking it looks like you
may have a video I can't I can give a
little hint
it's when we say evolutionary Game
Theory it real think about Game Theory
how do you play Monopoly and win how do
you play various games so it turns out
you can look at different strategies
that someone might have you know I'm
going to go for a park place I'm going
to go for Boardwalk I'm going to try to
there's all different strategy and you
can then write down mathematically okay
if you take this strategy what is the
probability that you will do well
against someone who's taking this other
stream it's all about most Offspring and
the so the strategies are ways to
survive long enough to reproduce and so
you can look at different strategies for
playing the game of life so for example
some organisms will have millions or
thousands of Offspring and
but they don't care about The Offspring
most of them will die
but if one percent of them make it
you're good humans tend to have just a
couple a handful of Offspring and we put
a lot of effort into them so those are
different strategies and so as you look
so some strategies for example in
perception humans really have focused in
our Evolution on vision and hearing and
less on smell and taste and so forth
other organisms focus on things that we
don't even have like echolocation and
bats so different organisms will take
different strategies The Game of Life is
how do I live long enough to reproduce
and how do I raise my Offspring to
maturity no do I do I just make lots of
them and let them fend for themselves
and most of them die but a fraction will
make it or do I make just a few of them
and really help them for 20 or 30 years
until they can go on their own or more
of these days or more of those days so
buy from evolutionary game theories
perspective what is the most successful
creature on planet Earth
uh well probably bacteria
um interesting right well yeah there
there's a lot more bacteria than not a
good answer than us and and maybe
viruses if they're more so from that
point of view
um
right the the winner is the one who
you know survives long enough to
reproduce and reproduces for a long
period of time and you know
cyanobacteria been around for billions
of years so you know they're they're
certainly candidates I'm not saying that
they're the final answer but that kind
of thing would be humans are you know
relative newcomers and I actually really
like the theory that humans are
bacteria's way of moving around which is
pretty interesting when you think that
we're outnumbered by the bacteria in our
guts on our skin and all of that stuff
it's pretty interesting I should have
guessed that answer but I didn't but
that makes a lot of sense right right so
so this gives you the idea of when
you're playing a game
there's lots of strategies especially in
a complicated game there's lots of
strategies and it's not that there's
going to be one best strategy it's
rather that if so you know if Tom is
using this strategy what should what
strategy should I use to counter Tom's
strategy and and so forth same thing in
business right it depends on who your
competition is what strategies you're
going to take and what is the governing
system and so forth like with the laws
and so forth that will all determine
your strategy so
you can use Game Theory and turn it into
a tool for studying
Evolution as a game where your bacteria
are trying to play the game of Life One
way humans are playing the game of Life
another way every different organism
every different plant is playing the
game of life with a different kind of
strategy that's really interesting it's
funny I I this is the third time I've
interviewed you and I've never pushed on
this because it there was something
about I couldn't wrap my brain around it
so I'm glad you took the time yeah uh
what's fascinating to me is every
species has its own umvelt yes which is
a really fascinating concept so I looked
this up once and every time I say this
that I think I must be wrong because it
just seems way too far off but humans
are able to perceive point zero zero
three five percent of the
electromagnetic spectrum and I was like
how is that that's so like every
everything that we see and think of as
the the known world is
.0035 percent right that is like
vanishingly small exactly right so our
our window on the on the world is
Trivial compared to what could in
principle be available and so
the question that you can then ask in a
technical fashion is
what is the probability that a strategy
of seeing
truth true structures about objective
reality would that strategy help you to
survive long enough to raise kids
[Music]
and
so we can ask that as a technical
question Evolution has the tools to do
that and the key concept is something
called a fitness payoff so it's Fitness
payoff is like if you're playing a game
there's a certain way that you get
points in the game if you're playing a
video game right you have to shoot
things down or avoid getting hit and to
get points and if you get enough points
you get to the next level of the game
well Fitness payoffs um if you get
enough Fitness payoffs what that
corresponds to is you're surviving long
enough to reproduce
and you don't go to the next level of
the game but your Offspring and your DNA
in your Offspring go to the next level
of the game
so here's the here's the big idea
we can ask these Fitness payoff
functions that govern our Evolution they
do depend on whatever the world is and
the world structure so they do depend on
the world they depend on the organism
you know what's fit for me is not fit
for a benthic fish being 5 000 meters
under the water would kill me it's just
what the benthic fish wants so so the
fitness payoffs depend on the true
structure of the world depends on the
organism you know Hoffman versus a fish
and the um the action feeding fighting
fleeing and mating and and so forth and
you can then ask what is the probability
this is now this is the key technical
question what is the probability that a
randomly chosen Fitness payoff function
that's governing my Evolution has
information
about the true structure of the world
right because it's that fit Evolution
tells us those Fitness payoffs are what
determine how your senses are going to
evolve what's the base assumption there
that the that reality is so complex in
fact I want to press I want to take a
second to really elucidate the example
you have about Grand Theft Auto which I
think is so brilliant
what's actually happening in Grand Theft
Auto is uh electrical currents are
toggling on and off Gates on the
computer and that somehow makes things
happen on your screen that you can
interact with and score points and all
that right
but at like if you look at a chip it is
so complicated that uh trying to like
zap electrodes in the right order
literally impossible right and so
everything that we we as the average
non-computer programmer think of as a
computer is really just the GUI it's the
interface and so you're there at a
really ABS really abstracted level it is
so abstract is to be nonsensical
compared to what's actually happening at
the electrical communication level with
the Machinery itself sending signals to
your TV exactly and if real life has
that same level of complexity then I get
why it would need to be so abstracted
that as to be just nonsensical compared
to what reality really is
something I think breaks some people's
intuition it certainly breaks in my
intuition when I think though that there
has to be some sort of mapping so the
example that you've said many times I
think is really on point is uh if people
are going to make fun of you what they
will say is oh you don't think any of
this is real go ahead and step in front
of that train and see if it kills you
right and of course it's going to so the
representation of the train
is pointing at something
that will change your state from alive
to dead that's right now whether all of
that is is so again abstracted from
what's actually happening at a larger
level I don't even know what to liken it
to
um but nonetheless stepping in front of
a train will flip you from alive to dead
whatever that means in the underlying
reality so do you think at all about
like do you care what it's mapping to or
are you just like eh it doesn't matter
it's too complicated we're not there yet
well I do care and that's why I'm
interested in this particular theorem
right because my interest is I'm seeing
a world of space and time and objects
with colors and shapes and motions how
is is that the true world is that the
the true structure of objective reality
or is this as divorced from reality is
what we're seeing as divorced from the
fundamental reality as my Grand Theft
Auto VR headset is from the voltages
inside the super computer that's running
it that's the that's this simple
question right so when I talk about
things outside of space-time it's just
like suppose someone had played Grand
Theft Auto
since they were one day old and their
parents had left them in a headset their
whole life and when they're 25 the
parents say guess what you've been in
the headset your whole life and and that
that person probably can't even what
could possibly be outside of my headset
I've lived my whole life inside this
headset and you pull it off and you
realize oh wow there's a whole world
that's entirely outside of what you're
in that's the question we're asking has
has Evolution shaped us with just a
little headset of VR headset that that
guides adaptive Behavior but shows us
none of objective reality that's that's
the technical question and the answer is
is very very clear the probability is
one
that we don't see the truth at all
meaning 100
okay so if the probability is a hundred
percent that you are seeing a very false
version right the the thing that that
seems to predict to me is that the
underlying reality is so complicated
that at least in this form you know a
house refer to that in this form it
would with our umvelt our ability to
process data whatever it would not make
sense to try to
[Music]
um
to deal with the reality that it's far
more efficient to create an abstraction
layer but if underlying reality is dead
simple that doesn't seem like it would
hold true so do we just presume that
there is Extreme complexity
well it turns out that the extreme
complexity isn't necessary for this
theorem to be true interesting why would
you need such an elaborate abstraction
if it isn't complicated well so it turns
out when you actually just look at the
math so suppose the world has some
number of states a billion States or 100
States whatever it might so there's some
number of states in the world
and you have some number of states of
perception I can see green red there's
lots of things I can see when you just
do a simple count look at all the
possible functions from the states of
the world to the states of my percentage
just count them so it doesn't the world
does not be complicated it could have
just you know 100 points or a thousand
points when you count those all the
functions and that are the fitness
functions
and ask how many of those functions
actually contain information about the
structures in the in the world it turns
out that very quickly the proportion
goes to zero it's just just so even if
the structure isn't that complicated
maybe there's only one structure in the
world that's all it has like a total
order something you know one is less
than two is less than three is like what
is the probability that that total order
so the world could be very simple it
only has one simple structure total
order and and the world only has you
know maybe a million States so it's not
a very complicated World a million
States
what is the probability that um the
fitness payoff functions that govern my
my Evolution would Preserve
the total order of information would
actually be able to tell me about the
toll order and the math is quite simple
and the answer is zero if it has to
predict something
like so when when I make the base
assumption that it's it's because it is
too complex so to get people I want to
start putting definitions to some of
these words so when you say State let's
say lights on lights off so we all live
where Earth has two states the Sun is up
the sun is down that's one uh
temperature would be another state could
be hot could be cold barometric pressure
could be high could be low could be wet
could be dry like we can just so there's
a lot of different things and so to your
point about the fish they're dealing
with massive pressures right if they
were to come up where there's no
pressure they would disintegrate or not
be able to move or whatever just like we
Crush down to the you know like a tiny
can so they would explode and we would
crush right exactly right right so okay
that when you say States that's one
example exactly I don't understand how
if everything were static it were one
state
that we would need an abstraction layer
to navigate it more effectively than
somebody that sees objective reality so
now I'm going to use an example to
further illustrate what I mean I'm going
to use an example you gave me the first
time you cannot imagine how many times
I've quoted you on this okay
you said uh Tom you have to understand
that objective reality isn't like oh
here's a table and it's got this nice
swirly grain pattern it's the number of
photons reflecting off of that desk and
the the amount of reflectivity and all
that
now irony of ironies as I have started
working in the metaverse you realize how
complicated the visual world is the the
0.0035 of the visual spectrum that we
actually see is insanely complicated to
replicate right right Donald right right
it's the hardest thing I've done in my
life it's crazy and I don't even have to
fully understand it I just have to guide
the team understands it anyway when you
said that I was like whoa what reality
is is very different than how I
experience it so cool complex right so
now I get why the math works out right
but if it isn't complex
so you don't seem to be struggling with
this what is it that you understand that
I don't or what is your base assumption
right that's different than mine
that makes it
makes sense to you that
to achieve maximum Fitness payoff
you would a hundred percent not retain
elements of reality right so so first I
don't deny that I I suspect that reality
is very complicated so so my point isn't
necessary that's not necessary for this
that's right it's just simply accounting
things so if you if you look at all the
functions from one set to another set
like so I have
functions for say I have numbers one
through ten and that's my base set and
I'm going to map them into numbers 1
through 10. so I can map one to three
and two to five and so forth so you know
if you just do okay if you think about
that problem you I could probably figure
okay how many different functions are
there right so you can write the write
down all now you can say okay how many
of those functions have the property
that um you know
they preserve that one is less than two
is less than three and less than four
how many of them scramble that order how
many preserve that order how many
scramble how many contain information
about the one less less than two less
than three less than four so this is
called combinatorics it's a branch of
mathematics 92 percent of people that
set a New Year's goal fail to achieve it
which is why I've created a 90-day
challenge designed specifically to
ensure that you hit your goals you
really can radically transform yourself
just click the link below to join me and
the entire impact Theory university
community to kick off 2023 right with
the impact 90 challenge right guys now
back to the episode
oh I'm unfortunately all too aware of it
because of nfts yes which require you to
understand this because you're making
you have to your point and maybe this is
what you're saying and so maybe I
actually now I'm understanding it let me
walk you through what we had to discover
in nfts okay so you create all these
traits right all these categories I
should say and then within each category
you have maybe 10 possible eyebrows that
it could be eyeball types hairstyles uh
facial hair so on and so forth
that outputs let's say 2 billion right
potential permutations exactly right but
you want to maintain a distribution in
the 10 000 that you're actually going to
show so we were all trying to do the
math and we're working it out and I'm
like
there's no way it's as simple there's
some problem and then we showed it to
physicists and they fell out laughing
and they're like yeah it's not that
simple and so they're like for you to
maintain the right the um the percentage
likelihood to get gold eyes let's say
right out of your two billion
combinations they're like you have to
force it down into this thing which they
called combinatorial or whatever and so
I was like okay
and so that's that really is the point
here that even though I agree with you
that the universe is probably the real
Universe whatever it is is very
complicated I I believe that
combinatorics blow up so quickly got it
by the time you just get to a few
hundred elements you know that as you
found the thing the explosion of
possibilities is so great that when they
ask how many of those possible Fitness
functions would actually be so special
that they contain information about the
structure of where they came from
out of all of the possible Fitness
functions that so it's not an overly
complicated world it's just the number
of potential mapping points and
combinations exactly right very
interesting because evolutionary theory
puts no restriction on the fitness
payoff functions
there could be as many as you can
imagine and there's no restrictions
there's no restriction that says they
have to show you the truth that's not
part of the theory right so until so and
and by the way no one knows how to put
that into the theory right so I mean to
say that it requires that only the
fitness functions that preserve the
truth would be a major revision to
evolutionary theory it would be
unrecognizable
so so when you look then and say okay
every Fitness payoff function is is
equal likely as any other Fitness payoff
function they're all in equal footing
and then you count the ones that
actually have information about the
truth
they go to zero probability in fast
order now there is one I should bring
out there's a group at Yale that has
recently published a paper that's trying
to push back on this
and what they say is if you have say a
bunch of like thousands of Fitness
payoff functions they're all radically
different
then they say that she'll be forced to
um to go to the truth and and the the
argument that they make is that if our
high level cognitions our beliefs our
goals and so forth are not going to
interfere with our perceptions
they claim that then our perceptions
have to map have a single mapping from
the state of the world into the state of
our senses has to be a single mapping
you can't have more so because one thing
I could do with a lot of Fitness
functions is to say well this this
function is different from that one so I
will do this kind of mapping from the
world into my senses with this Fitness
path function then I'll do another
mapping with this Fitness payoff
function and and they say you know if
you're going to have what we call
cognitive impenetrability so what you
believe cognitively cannot affect what
you see okay that's that's the argument
then you must have only one mapping
well it so that's their assumption so
hold on let me make sure I understand
that so they're saying that
basically so that your delusions don't
create the exterior world or at least
your perception of it you have to have
this mapping so that you're actually
detecting and seeing what is real
they're saying that if what you believe
doesn't affect your senses in a
fundamental way yep
then they claim
that that entails that you can only have
one mapping from the world the fitness
the the mapping of your senses from the
whatever the world is into what what
you're seeing the colors and the shapes
and so forth there can only be one map
um that that holds regardless of what
the fitness payoff functions that was
their claim
so and another reason to bring this up
is because this is a recently published
paper the claim is false it's it's
trivial to show counter examples they're
fundamental claim is false please do as
a way just to make sure that I actually
understand what they're saying because
this sounds like what they're trying to
protect against is
um hallucinations basically becoming
subjectively real
right so so I actually think that it's
true probably to a large extent that
what we believe does not really affect
fundamentally what we see so technical
term we use the geek term is cognitive
and penetrability of perception that's
what the philosophers of science will
talk about in cognitive scientists that
are and you can think about scientists
might like this because they'll say look
we want to
use our senses in our experiments I want
to my theory makes a prediction I have
to go look and see if the prediction is
true well if my theory that I'm holding
would change what I see then science
isn't going to really be objective right
I mean if I believe this Theory and it
changes how I see the data then I might
just see the data that confirms the
theory and I can't escape so that's why
there's the philosophy of science has
been very interested in this question
are are high level theoretical beliefs
and just our beliefs as Everyday People
do they get in there and somehow
fundamentally affect how we see the
world and there is a sort of a way you
could say that you know I the way I
believe things does change my world but
not they don't change like the color I
see or the three-dimensional structure
of the cube here that I'm seeing I mean
they might change it in some way but but
not fundamentally like that so that's
the that's the question
and so it's trivial I mean so when the
group at Yale makes this point that you
know if you have lots of different
Fitness payoff functions and you don't
have your high level beliefs interfering
with
the process of perception then you can
only have one one map from the world
into your senses and of course they
don't prove that they just state it
without proof and so it's trivially
false we have made counter examples it's
very very easy to make counter examples
I can design a system in which I have
say two Fitness payoff functions
and I I use onefitnesspal function to
make one map from the world into my
perceptions use the other Fitness
function to make another map and if I
have a system that has no high level
beliefs then the high level beliefs
aren't interfering with it there's the
counter example right there no cognitive
penetration of perception multiple Maps
but then I can add beliefs and say I
know I can have beliefs there as long as
they don't interfere with this mapping
here I could have two two maps why not
so it's they're they're the guys the the
group at Yale they're brilliant
experimentalists and you know one of
them is a really good friend of one of
my collaborators I mean they're they
were post-docs at MIT together and so
forth so they're brilliant
experimentalists but the fundamental
assumption that they're making is just
trivially false and so so then what how
do we see this in our perceptions the
way we see it in our perceptions is
we have probably hundreds of thousands
if not millions of Fitness payoff
functions that are governing our our
Behavior so what do we do with all that
complexity what we do is we group The
Fitness payoff functions into groups
that are similar
and we take the and we make simple
little data structures out of them and
those data structures are what we call
Objects
so this object
is good for drinking can you what what
is a data structure when you say that
it's an object meaning my mind
groups it so that I can differentiate
the cup from the coaster from the desk
what I'm saying is we're making all this
stuff up as a simple way to represent
the fitnesses fitness payoffs and how to
get them so so for example in when
you're playing Grand Theft Auto
you're playing a game
um if you looked inside the super
computer
there there is no red Porsche there is
no steering wheel there is no gas pedal
in some sense those are what I call
Simple data structures they're coding
for you know the gas pedal and pushing
on the gas pedal is coding for who knows
countless millions of voltage changes
happening in in exactly the right
sequence in the computer I have this
trivial data structure gas pedal push on
it that triggers this whole other thing
that I don't want to know about it's
really too complicated so that's what I
mean by these simplifying data
structures my steering wheel is this
simple data structure that I can use to
interact with who knows how many
billions or trillions of voltages and
make them do exactly the right sequence
in the right order
could I say representation instead of
data structure sure absolutely data
structure is the computer science term
so computer scientists would would be
very happy with that but but
representation is is perfectly good and
so the idea then is
what evolution has done from an
evolutionary point of view is it takes
all these Fitness payoff functions that
govern us the governor our survival and
that we need to respect in order to play
the game of life and we organize them so
an apple is an object it's a
representation of a bunch of Fitness
payoffs for example the Apple if I'm
interested in mating
Apple's no good if I'm interested in
eating great if I'm interested in a
weapon
so so I mean I could throw it to
someone's head but it's not going to do
much damage you know if I'm you know so
there's if but if I have a sword
a sword well for for mating no good for
eating not really I mean I could use it
to cut a coconut in half but but I can't
eat this I can't eat the sword for
fighting great but not if you're
fighting against a you know a gun and
things like that so every object and we
can recognize I would say on the order
of 30 or 40 000 different objects basic
kinds of objects so what that indicates
is that Evolution has taken all these
hundreds of thousands maybe millions of
Fitness payoff functions and it's not
making one map from the world into our
senses it's making a bunch of different
maps and those different maps are what
we call Objects and our high level
cognition all it does is I I'm hungry
okay or I won't be looking for tables I
won't be looking for the moon I'll be
looking for apples and bananas and
things like that those data structures
those representations that have high
Fitness payoffs for for the action of
eating and so visual attention paying
attention to different objects is our
way of switching from this
representation of Fitness payoffs to
this representation of Fitness payoffs
as I need to be able to to do to survive
long enough to reproduce and so that's
so this sort of technical but it's the
reason I bring it out is because this is
brand new it's gotten a lot of attention
from Yale and so it's an important thing
from the scientific side to to Really
lay to rest that that you know there's
not one mapping that's required from the
world into our senses by Evolution even
if we assume that our our beliefs don't
you know interfere with our cognition
our cognitions don't interfere with our
perceptions
that doesn't entail that we have to have
one mapping it's just a false assumption
when she let go of that false assumption
then you're opened up to realize that
objects every object is just a data
structure coding for a whole group of
Fitness payoffs and that's how Evolution
deals with this okay so the reason that
I find this so endlessly fascinating is
I
um in trying the whole reason I stepped
in front of the camera in the first
place was I made a very profound change
in my life and I thought hey anybody can
do this but it really is about reframing
the world so recoding re coming up with
new references or seeing the cup in a
different light whatever so it's
interesting so the idea of our beliefs
don't influence our cognition or
influence the mapping to the
um the real world it's probably only at
the margins it's pretty minor as you
said but I think that there is a lot of
um difference in outcome in The Game of
Life as we think about it in a modern
context depending on how you code things
but I've I've struggled with this so at
one point I was going to write a book
and I was working with a Ghostwriter and
I was saying like it doesn't matter
what's true all that matters is that
it's effective and that the way that you
view the world is moving you towards
your goals and this was like at the
height of trump and the Ghost Writer was
like yo I'm not writing that and she was
like you need to tell me that you don't
believe in like a post-truth world and I
was like that's interesting because no I
don't mean just lie and make things up
but what is guiding my decision making
isn't a quest for what's true it's a
quest for what works
and so as I think about Fitness payoffs
I get that I'm going to put a pin in the
following for a second when I hear you
talk it feels like you think the level
of abstraction is is like being in a
game headset versus what the game
machine is doing itself that that is
so different right and so we'll get to
that in a minute because that's what
we're talking about but even like at the
layer of okay I've got my headset on I'm
locked in like even there how you can
influence things by how you perceive
them is interesting and we're living in
a moment where saying post-truth
triggers a lot of things I want to strip
all that away but get people to focus on
because really really truly in life what
you're talking about with Fitness
payoffs is how people should look at
their own belief system of like okay I
believe the way that I tell people to
judge what is true is what is the thing
that allows you to better predict the
outcome of your actions and so if I
believe in gravity that allows me to
better predict how to handle this cup
right because if I hold it over here and
let go and expect it to stay there I'm
going to be very disappointed when it
crashes to the floor and so believing in
gravity even if it's fake is very useful
stepping on the gas pedal even if there
really is no Porsche even if there is no
gas pedal if I'm in the game like just
assuming that that's how it works even
though it isn't true it's a total
abstraction it's going to help you get
towards your goal if your goal is to win
that game so all of that is very
interesting I do think that we can
even take something like synesthesia
where would you say that that's they're
intentionally
um using cognition no but their
perception is like I don't know if you
know who Dave Grohl is but uh drummer
for Nirvana lead singer Foo Fighters and
he is a synesthet of his own
um claim my own admission yeah and he
said that I forget if he sees or shapes
I think there might be shapes and for
him and he said that's why it's so easy
for him to remember songs because they
have these literal shapes yes and so he
just has to remember the sequence of the
shapes and he can play the song and
that I mean that really has an impact
he's able to remember things that I
wouldn't be able to remember for
instance because his perception is being
influenced by the way that his brain
processes data so for whatever reason
two areas of his brain trigger when he
hears something whereas in mine only one
triggers
and
so that to me when I again going back to
why I find this so interesting
that to me says hey I don't know how
much of what you're perceiving is real
but I know that there are consequences
to how you categorize so your idea of
data structures is going to matter a lot
and so if you can categorize something
as shapes and sound it's going to be
easier to remember if you categorize
like for instance the thing I'm always
trying to get people to understand is
if you have what I call the only belief
that matters that you can if you put
time and energy into getting better at
something you actually will get better
right if you believe that then you'll
pursue Improvement if you don't believe
that then you won't because it wouldn't
make any sense right so you miss out on
Fitness payoffs based on your cognitive
assessment of how the world works
right so all of that's fascinating okay
absolutely and important understand
where my brain breaks with your thesis
is how different
what you perceive is and what the world
is like and I know and this is where it
gets hard because I think you would say
we don't know what's under space-time
right
but what's your best guess like as we
strip away
this layer and this might be the time to
talk about Consciousness but I don't
want to lead the witness what what do
you if it isn't space time
stab in the dark for me what the hell is
it well I'll tell you what the
physicists are doing on this because the
physicists are the ones who are saying
space time is not fundamental
so it's there it's a pointer it's a
representation it's a data structure
it's a data structure to something
deeper that's right but it's it happens
to be the human brain which is already a
data structure you're already making
that up exactly right but that data
structure
represents things through space-time
exactly right that's our headset space
time is just our headset and it only
goes down to the is that the plank
length I always hear you quote a a size
plank length is 10 to the minus 33 so
that is where you're quoting right
because that's the smallest thing that
we can measure yeah that's the smallest
thing that's the smallest scale at which
space time has any operational meaning
if you try to go smaller space time
ceases to make any operational sense at
all because gravity insists that below
that things have condensed to too fine
of a point it becomes a black hole
exactly right you create a black hole
Okay so
so and if you think about it and we know
that isn't true like why can't they just
be true smaller than that is a black
hole yay you know well we know it's we
know that at the plank scale you you
um
space time stops and you get you you get
black holes so what's the problem well
black hole is a singularity it means we
don't know what's happening wait so you
get Infinities popping up
um but black holes are real right
they're they're real as a data structure
they're they're they're real stopping
points in our understanding but they're
in the universe well they're um
I know this gets complicated because the
universe is a representation oh yeah so
and so where I want to start Penrose and
others have been studying the properties
of black holes right Penrose won the
Nobel Prize very recently for his his
wonderful work on black holes and so
there's a lot of work that's being done
to understand the properties of black
holes for example the amount of
information you can store in a black
hole doesn't depend on its volume only
the surface area
yeah I don't understand that yeah right
right this is it's very very strange but
that turns out to be true in everyday
space the amount of information that you
can store in this volume here is not
dependent on the volume it depends on
the surface the surface area
that's the universe we live on it's it's
so that's LED people to this holographic
kind of idea oh every word out of your
mouth I'm like we actually are in a
simulation we haven't even talked about
the non local things are not locally
real
right we'll get to that because that's
the new Nobel Prize this year which is
insane and literally just says you're in
a simulation and it's the same as
rendering and when you look at something
it renders when you look away it it
doesn't and we can prove it
mathematically yeah that's right way too
fascinating we'll get to that but first
I want to understand like black holes
the word real gets very slippery in this
conversation right but black holes are
observable yes
so so the idea is that the notion of
space-time at like instead of 10 to the
minus 33 centimeters say 10 to the minus
40 centimeters what would that mean it
does it has no meaning it has there's
nothing you can do with it so so black
holes are fine they're they're objects
there that are at the end point of what
space-time can do
but if we say but I thought space time
was fundamental that means I should be
able to talk about what's happening at
10 to the minus 50 centimeters intended
and you just cannot there's no
operational meaning and in that sense so
you're saying whatever is fundamental
will be able to tell you exactly what's
happening inside of a black hole
well or it will tell you that this whole
framework in which black holes appear is
the wrong framework and thusly black
holes are just a data structure for
something else that is describable once
you get outside once you get out of
space time and and you know it's hard
for us to think outside of space-time
like yeah can we can we beat this point
to death for a second because this one
was a a breakthrough for me when I
realized I always thought of the plank
plonk length as like so infinitesimally
small that like we should all be in awe
and you're like
like that space-time breaks down that
early is just ridiculous and I was like
okay that's a different frame of
reference yeah it's it's a very shallow
data structure if it was 10 to the minus
33 trillion centimeters that it broke
down I'd be I'd be impressed 10 to the
minus 33. we got cheated this is a
really shallow data start it's only four
dimensions I can't even imagine
something in five dimensions
I can't even imagine a new color that
I've never seen before so so we've been
given this really we think that we're in
many cases we think we're the epitome of
intelligence and the the smartest thing
in the universe my feeling is
we've been shortchanged really shallow
data structure only three dimensions of
space one dimension of time we got a
cheap headset and so when that's a fun
way to say it
when data breaks down like that right
what so I always forget the guy's name
so I wrote it down but Nema or Connie
Hamed right
so I've heard you talk about them a lot
so I started doing some research on him
and if I'm understanding what he's
saying correctly is basically when you
have a data structure that falls apart
that early right which was again a total
reframe for me because I thought of that
as like oh my God uh but apparently when
you understand this better you realize
that's that's a pretty early tap out so
when a data structure falls apart that
early that that tells you that it's
proximal right which I'm interpreting as
a it's the finger pointing at the Moon
it is not the moon itself exactly and so
now you know you're looking at a pointer
and so that seems to be the thing that
his whole case rests on for uh space
time being doomed that if your data
structure falls apart that early you
know there's no way this is the
fundamental thing
that's one of the big pointers the other
big pointer a couple other big pointers
he gives is that when you let go of
space-time and you start Computing
particle interactions like two gluons
hit each other and four gluons go
spreading out the kind of thing that
happens at the Large Hadron Collider all
the time if you compute it inside of
space-time
that one I mentioned two gluons in four
gluons out hundreds of pages of algebra
for one interaction
why is it so complicated because it's
the wrong data structure it's an ugly
nasty data structure and the thing that
you're doing the algebra on is in what
way they scatter inside Space time you
have to do to make all the math work out
you have to have these Feynman diagrams
with virtual Parts people are trying
that they're trying to say okay a theory
of everything right which you are saying
does not exist and will never exist but
we'll get to that later right uh so if
there were a Theory of Everything though
we should be able to know everything so
finely that I can tell you oh if they
Collide at this energy with this
directionality it will scatter exactly
like this with these probabilities you
get your probabilities of their of their
scattering okay and so they're just like
oh my God it's a dizzying amount of math
that's right
until you let go of space time and then
that one that I mentioned two blue ones
in four gluons out it's one term
you can compute it by hand it's like
when they hit they'll be a diamond
yeah well because you need to start
talking in shapes right well yeah so so
it's a shape Beyond space-time whose
volumes so yeah it's a shape outside of
space-time
outside of our headset and the volumes
of this shape actually tell you the
probabilities of the various kinds of
particle interactions okay so and so it
turns billions of terms into a handful
of terms and it shows you new symmetry
so that's what the physicists really
love it's simpler math which is great
and then all of a sudden you see new
symmetries that you can't see in space
time okay I'm going to try to draw an
analogy which is already going to break
things but let me see how close I get
you're in Grand Theft Auto right you
step on the gas and you go forward and
we're just like oh my God the math to
predict in what way the car is going to
move when you step on the gas pedal is
ridiculous
but if we were to be actually looking at
the electrical pattern that's stepping
on the gas which would be pressing
buttons on your controller
in a certain context if we understood
that there's a pattern outside of the
headset so in the the PlayStation or the
Xbox there's an electrical pattern
inside of that that looks so if you know
chess and I don't but I'm familiar with
the the idea of chunking so apparently
what Chess Masters do is they're not
looking at the individual pieces on the
board they just know the patterns so
they're like oh that image of where the
pieces are in this order that's this
setup so they've chunked the whole board
into like oh I know where we're at in
the game and I know what the right next
move is so basically what you're saying
is you step on the gas and it gives you
an image of a shape of electrical
patterns outside of the headset
if that's what you're saying I at least
understand
I I don't I could not give you the math
or any of that but I get like this
representation this data structure
which you think of as being real
stepping on the gas and the red portion
goes is actually this
chunk of electrical impulses if we think
of it as a shape or a pattern or a
rhythm or however we're going to think
of it is that what we're saying that
could be a helpful metaphor and I've got
another metaphor that may also try to
help people on the because that's an
important point that you're raising so
suppose here's another way to think
about this suppose that I'm looking at a
video
and are seeing all these pixels
and the pixels are moving in really
complicated ways you know there's the
red pixels and green pixels and light
pixels and dark and I'm just and and
I've and I know that there's something
interesting going on and so I write down
all these equations for the Motions of
these pixels and but but someone says
you know what there is just this I've
got this little Rubik's Cube and I'm all
I'm doing is rotating a Rubik's Cube
and but but you're only seeing the pixel
projection of if you just could see this
3D object you would realize how simple
it is but when you only see the pixels
and see all the then it's oh man I got a
I've got to model all the pixels moving
on my screen how do I do that well if
you can just let go of the screen behind
it there's this unified geometric object
the Rubik's Cube and if you just see oh
it just rotates rigidly that's and that
rigid rotation is the only motion I need
it's a rotation here I have to look at
all the pixels and this pixel I'm paying
attention to the dots rather than the
shape space time it's paying attention
to the dots right so in space time we're
we're stuck on the video screen and
we're trying to model all the pixels
moving around the video screen and what
the physicists have said if you let go
of the video screen
take it off you see that these geometric
objects like that Rubik's Cube are
outside of it and their structure is
much simpler I'm not saying simple but
much much simpler but it when it
projects into this really see you lost
information in the projection right
that's why you have all these little
pixels you have a 3D object here the
two-dimensional screen so you love so
now it looks really complicated so
what's happening then when these things
Collide are they're making a new Rubik's
Cube so or they're just rotating a shape
that's already there this is where I
have no way to Anchor myself well so
particles are things inside space-time
right yes so so when we look at particle
interactions that the Large Hadron
Collider we're looking at the pixels the
Motions of the pixels inside Space time
the amplitohedron and other structures
that they're finding okay amplitohedron
is something you say so fast I've heard
you say it's a gazillion times but I had
to look it up right so an
amplitudehedron is a shape yes uh
geometric shape right in how many
dimensions
um
they can be in small numbers Dimensions
but they can go to Infinity so there's
there's different kinds of different
sites of amps to heater depending on how
many particles you want to enter and
that's our Rubik's Cube that would be
the Rubik's Cube beyond the headset yep
and by the way
um this is brand new this was published
in 2013. this is not even 10 years old
so this is this is all new stuff
um this amplitudehedron so it's no
surprise that people haven't heard of it
in in many physicists um haven't heard
of it it's truly truly remarkable
Quantum theorists in fact and so how
what makes people think the
amplitohedron is actually real
that we have detected the shape outside
of the headset well I think
that the really brilliant physicists
would not say we're done they would say
we've taken a first step outside of the
headset of space-time and one of the
first structures we found is the
amplitohedron that doesn't mean it's
going to be the final answer they're
looking at other structures something
called the cosmological polytope and
surface hedra and and so forth
cosmological polytrope polytope polytope
what is that that is another geometric
it's another geometric shape that Nema
or Connie Hamed Juan malda Cena and and
others a lot of the work has been done
at the institute for advanced study and
collaborators with the people there and
this is trying see the amplitohedron is
primarily for flat space time my
understanding so without gravity
but when you deal with gravity and and
Einstein told us that sort of curve
space time then it's then things get a
little more complicated and in that case
um I think they're looking at the
cosmological polyte for more
um like cosmological kinds of
predictions so the amplitude hedron so
and and I'm sure that they're saying
that they're not saying the cosmological
polytope is the final word
what's really interesting is they've
already taken a Step Beyond the
amplitohedron
so there's something called meaning even
that they don't think is fundamental or
just that it's part of the fundamental
they they think it's an important step
outside of space-time but what surprises
the physicists is that the heart of the
amplitahedron is something called a
permutation a kind of permutation called
a decorated permutation it's like
shuffling cards through permuting cards
so it's a surprise that that if you let
go of space-time Things become simple
you get the samples to hedron the math
becomes simple and then when you look at
the amplitude heater and ask about its
essential character you find out that
behind the amplitahedron are is just
permutations decorative permutations
shuffling cards kind of thing and so
we're at this position so this is only
you know in the last couple decades
right that this has happened the
amplitude hedron is 2013. so it's only
nine years old
so here we're at this really interesting
position in in science in physics I like
to think of it like the movie 2001 A
Space Odyssey remember the scene it was
great movie yeah and there's a scene
where there's the monolith
is just sitting there
pregnant with meaning and the apes are
looking at it they're afraid of it
they're beating on it they don't know
what to do with it you get the sense
that they know it's important but they
haven't a clue what it's pointing to
that's where we are
the amplitahedron and the decorative
permutations are these monoliths outside
of space-time there's there's no
Dynamics
who ordered this monolith the amplitude
heater and just sitting outside of
space-time it captures all these
amplitudes all the particle amplitude it
captures the structure of space-time
Einstein's special relativity Quantum
unit quantum theory and a so-called
unitarity of quantum theory
so this is deeper this thing is deeper
than space-time it's deeper than quantum
theory quantum theory itself is not deep
enough
this structure the amplitudehedron this
monolith is beyond quantum theory but it
codes for quantum theory as projection
in space time so who ordered this like
just in 2001 A Space Odyssey the Apes
you can imagine
what is this where'd it come from why
what what's it going on we don't imagine
me asking that yeah well everybody's
asking it right now you know who or is
it just a static structure physicists
like Dynamics we want something we want
to have equations of motion we don't
have that we just have here's the
geometry and here's behind it this
permutation
they're just sitting there who ordered
that and why so that's where so but the
attitude is not one of
um despair this is really for the young
Geniuses who are doing the stuff this is
like fabulous right
we're the first generation that not me
but the young physics the first
generation that really gets to step
outside of the headset of space-time
they've already found these monoliths
The amplitahedron Decorator permutations
and just to really make that simplistic
shapes shapes and then the shuffling of
the shapes that's right some shuffling
that codes for the shapes
it captures their essential structure in
some sense even the geometry the volumes
and so forth are redundant there's this
even simpler more compressed
description right now the decorated
permutation is the most compressed
description that doesn't have any extra
bells and whistles the amplitude hedron
in some sense
you know the positive gross mining that
use that they used to build and so forth
they have extra bells and whistles in
some sense the amplitohedron boils it
down to its essence but but the so it's
shuffles permutations and and the big
question is
why why why this I mean if you in the
beginning God said why would God say
that well what why what is this let
there be shapes let there be the
amplitude heater and let there be
shuffles that doesn't seem quite deep
enough right it seems like there's got
to be something beyond that some
something dynamical and there's no clue
right now in the physics about a
dynamical thing behind the decorated
permutations or the amplitohedron
well we just lost me so I'm guessing
that we lost a lot of people so this is
outside of the headset so we're
beginning to get to what we think may be
these foundational pillars but it's so
early that nobody really knows what
these are yet let's go back to the
quantum realm for a second so this is
one of my pet peeves that people in the
mindset space tend towards magical
thinking and there's something about
quantum entanglement the quantum tubules
in the brain or whatever it is that they
think about collapsing and all that
um
one is there anything even inside the
headset is there anything to be learned
from the quantum Realms is a Quantum
realm point to anything outside of the
headset
um and
where are we like how how do people not
drift into meaninglessness as they begin
to pursue this because it I because I'm
so focused on usefulness like I get very
um agitated might be the right word when
people are like oh we're Quantum
entangled and that's what the soul is
and I want to tear my hair out
right so it's one thing just to say
those words it's another thing to have a
mathematical model and a mathematical
model that actually predicts precise
outcomes of precise experiments and so
that's the difference when physicists
talk about quantum entanglement
they're talking serious math and the
serious experiments that just a week ago
the Nobel Prize was awarded to um three
of the Pioneers in testing one of the
key predictions of entanglement uh which
is that the real world isn't real so
yeah it's called
um
local realism the the belief that we
tend to have of local realism so objects
like
an electron has a property like its
position or its spin
whether or not you observe it has got a
value of that because it's real and we
assume we've assumed that's right that's
that's the reality whether you see it or
not it is spinning up or spinning down
right it's like saying the train is
there and it's going to hit you even if
you don't see it you close your eyes
it's not going to stop the train from
hitting you so the electron really has
its position it really has a spin when
that's not observed and and
the other assumption is is locality
those it's Einstein's assumption that
that nothing No Effects travel faster
than the speed of light through space
through space-time
and so that the two together are called
local realism so it's possible that when
we say local realism is false that it's
either the realism that's wrong or the
locality
so it could be you could say Okay local
realism is false because there really
are
properties that exist but they travel
their influences go faster than the
speed of light or you can say nothing
travels best from a big light but so the
realism is false I believe Einstein but
the realism is false my attitude is both
are false local and realism are both
false and that comes out of
um just the idea of the space time
itself is not fundamental right and so
let me say it real simply for people
like me
things only exist when you look at them
right
you create them when you see them
like in Grand Theft Auto live VR headset
on I look over there and I see a red
Camaro
is there a red Camaro in the super
computer no the average person is going
to reject this out of hand right
so one we're going to have to walk
through the Nobel Prize so thankfully
you had linked to an article so I read
about it it melted my brain about an
hour before you and I sat down together
and I was just like how the hell is this
real or true I guess because it's not
real uh and then so we'll we'll walk
through that but to give people the
analogy to Anchor them
um
I think you and I disagree about this
and I've always told people largely
because I don't want to argue about it
and I don't really know that I don't
think we live in a simulation the more
times I interview you the more I'm like
maybe we do or maybe the way our fitness
payoffs get mapped it is so effectively
like a simulation as you might as well
think of it as living in a simulation
so I've written this story with my team
and I want to overly take credit but
we've created this thing called project
Kaizen and in Project Kaizen they're
um in this thing that we call the array
the array is basically quantum foam and
the idea is that it's information Theory
so that you
information can travel faster than the
speed of light
and that ultimately the thing that
drives people mad in our world is to ask
the question where is the array because
they're thinking of it as like a Quantum
supercomputer or something but
in the lore where we play with that
question I want to give away what we
think is the the right answer but we
play with that question a lot and so one
of the characters in the story is
literally driving himself mad by asking
the question where is the array I know
if I can generate enough energy I can
rip this Veil and I can see through
beyond the headset into like is this
sitting on a desk somewhere and like can
we actually discover where that is and
okay so working with that idea
at first I thought nah I mean this is
all just a story but the more that I
look at this in in this is in real life
put that in their quotes in real life
you only render things when the player
is looking at it it's the only way to
not melt the computer right right so as
the they move their characters eyes
around they see different parts of the
world it it literally comes into
existence it gets rendered when they
look at it and it ceases to be rendered
when they look away so they feel like
they're in the seamless 3D environment
right but in reality it's a trick and so
it's only rendering right up to the edge
of your field of view and then outside
of that it's gone exactly yeah as you
describe the math that is what's really
happening right
that's I mean it's kind of fun and cool
and interesting right
um okay so with that analogy people
understand that one I agree at
if you try to replicate so going back to
what I was saying about if I try to
replicate this table make it look
photorealistic it is unbelievably
difficult and there are so many elements
of like reflectivity and depth of how
far the light penetrates and absolutely
oh my God and it on and on and on right
absolutely the truth is hitting your
career goals is not easy you have to be
willing to go the extra mile to stand
out and do hard things better than
anybody else but there are 10 steps I
want to take you through that will 100x
your efficiency so you can crush your
goals and get back more time into your
day you'll not only get control of your
time you'll learn how to use that
momentum to take on your next big goal
to help you do this I've created a list
of the 10 most impactful things that any
High achiever needs to dominate and you
can download it for free by clicking the
link in today's description right my
friend back to today's episode so we
know that there are all these things you
can do to recreate reality one of the
things is you build reality in a virtual
environment is you have to deal with
rendering only that which you're pointed
at what you measure exactly right as we
look at the quantum world that holds
true in a way that is so weird I don't
know whether to laugh or be creeped out
or whatever but it's utterly fascinating
okay so now to the Nobel Prize so we
know that that's how you would have to
do it if you want to recreate reality
and the Nobel Prize was one four showing
that the idea of local realism that
things exist and have definite values of
their properties and with influences
that go no faster than the speed of
light that's false that Assumption of
local realism is false and
there are even really interesting
Quantum setups where you can prove
that when I make this particular set of
measurements
I know with probability one what I will
get like on my eighth measurement I know
with probability one what the value will
be again probability one means 100 100
that's right 100 what I'm going to
measure and yet I also can prove that
that value let's say of the position or
the spin cannot possibly exist until the
moment I make the measurement okay so
let's walk people through that so
Einstein right and after two other
people basically said huh the math
predicts that what you just said is true
that I can have two
um we end up calling them quantumly
entangled particles but I have two
particles
I forget which type racing away from
each other right to the opposite ends of
the solar system very very very far
apart
and one of them we know they have to
have opposite spin so one of them is
going to be spinning up one of them is
going to be spinning down right and they
said they're like socks so one of them
could be the right sock and one of them
is a left sock so once you measure that
oh this is the right one then you know
automatically that the other person has
the left one right and the Nobel Prize
was one for proving that you don't
they're not like socks right right it's
not you it's not even that you don't
know which is which it's that whichever
one you look at first if that spins up
then you know instantaneously the other
one is spinning down but causally
because this one is spinning up that one
must be spinning down right right okay
so now the part I don't understand which
by the way means that these things will
react effectively to each other because
you measured it instantaneously across
the entire solar system in this example
which is way faster than light
my question is when you measure it if it
wasn't already spinning up or down what
makes it spin up or down
is it just probability yeah that's all
that physics can tell us right now are
the probabilities for this so so and
probability is where explanation stops
right when you put a probability measure
in your theory you're saying
my understanding stops right here so I
need a probability measure because if I
could tell you how it worked then I
would tell you how it worked well right
now I can just say here's the
probabilities and so that's what we get
in quantum theory is and and so that's
why Einstein said I don't you know God
doesn't play dice he didn't like the
idea that that God didn't know all the
way down what was going on that there
would be these random probabilities but
yeah when you do the experiments it
turns out entanglement is real
and and that then leads to the
conclusion ultimately that local realism
is false
and it's it's it's truly stunning but if
you think about it in terms of a headset
as you said I render like in the virtual
reality Grand Theft Auto I render the
Camaro when I look and I garbage collect
it when I look away I just delete it I
render particles I render space time
itself space time itself
doesn't exist
except as a data structure that we use
and so
it's now in terms of a simulation I
should make a distinction between what
we're saying here and a different kind
of notion of simulation that Nick
Bostrom has so there's a simulation
theory of Nick Nick Basham and others
where where they you know say look this
isn't real it could be just some
computer geek that did a program and
we're just creatures in the simulated
World in this program and it turns out
that that computer Greek it's herself is
just a a program from someone else at a
lower level and there's this whole
hierarchy uh all the way down until you
get to some base programmer but they
assume that the base level is a
space-time world
so they're still stuck on the headset
that that kind of simulation Theory
isn't thinking big enough you have to
let the and they're also assuming that
that programs can create Consciousness
which is another story no one's been
able to show how how that's even
possible so they're just not thinking
big enough you've got to let go of
space-time at the base of the entire
hierarchy of simulations to really get
where the physicists have gone space
time itself is merely a headset so so
the standard simulation Theory isn't
thinking big enough it's still stuck in
the headset as we strip away the headset
is local realism going to remain
false or will there be something a
better way to ask it when we strip away
the headset is God still playing dice
I'll put it this way
as scientists
making theories
we will always come up short
we will always have a place where we say
in our Theory this is where our
knowledge stops
and what that's what we call the
assumptions of our Theory so every
scientific theory
says if you grant me these assumptions
I'll explain all this wonderful stuff
but you have to grant me those
assumptions and I can't explain those
assumptions like even Einstein he said
let me grant me that the speed of light
is constant for all observers and Grant
me that the laws of physics are the same
for all all people moving in uniform
motion if you grant me those two things
then I can do all this wonderful stuff
and that's the way all scientific
theories work grant me this assumption
these Miracles because we don't yet
understand these things well and and
it's also I think intrinsic to what it
means to be a scientific theory
so there's no escaping this a scientific
theory there is no Theory of Everything
that's a flat out statement um there can
never be a scientific theory because of
girdle's incompleteness incompleteness
theorem but but even just before girdles
in completeness theorem every Theory
says grant me these assumptions please
you have to make certain assumptions to
even to brood up but isn't that just our
ignorance
probably so but our ignorance is
unlimited
it's interesting so I heard you and
yosha Bach yeah
uh discussing and he said something that
Rings intuitively true to me which is
that we always want to say I will never
understand that right but we just don't
understand it right now and just like
Newton and his whole thing at the end of
his life where he was like the right way
to think of me is as a child on the
shore playing with the seashell in front
of the entire vassee of undiscovered
truth right and his students though
didn't believe that
now maybe out of arrogance maybe they
that just sat so icky with them to think
that they were so ignorant to so many
things
but also to be generous to them maybe
because they believed on a long enough
timeline we really would figure things
out or even if you'll grant me my
Miracle of as we begin to merge with
machines will we be able to process data
in such a more vast way that we're able
to
see what is true all of the mismapping
of the or all of the combinatorial
combinations become manageable just
because we can crunch so much data and
so oh you might as well look at what is
exactly real
do you does that so
with that set up I finally just went in
and looked up girdles incompleteness
theorem because I've tried to hang with
you every episode around this and
looking at it it's basically that there
are and this will be the world's most
simplistic interpretation but there are
um you can create an equation
that you know to be true but you can't
prove it
right and it's it's beyond me to be able
to explain how that's true but when you
read about it's like whoa okay so you
can really create it's it's kind of like
the mathematical version of a linguistic
trap where it's like the statement on
this side of the card or the statement
on the other side of the card is false
you turn it over and it says what the
statement on the other side of the card
is true and so now you're trapped
because they can't both be right or
wrong right so it I can't explain it
better than that but like without that
if there isn't things that are
if he's right and there are things that
are true but that cannot be proven I get
why you say that we'll never have a
theory of everything but if we just
don't understand enough yet
then it feels like we will eventually no
girdles incompleteness theorem
is
definitive it says that no matter how
complicated your mathematical or
scientific theory is you can always
produce a new statement that's true
and is not provable within the theory
that you've got
so it means it escaped your current
theory your theory was not a theory of
everything because it wasn't a theory of
this it didn't capture this truth so you
didn't have a theory of everything so
you say okay well I'll just put it in my
theory so now I've got then girdle says
well sorry now with your new augmented
system here's this new I'll use it to
show you there's this new thing that's
true
but can't be proven so you don't have a
theory of everything and you add that
and and what that means is that there is
this Unlimited
Realm
of Truth
that's forever beyond our notion of
proof of scientific theory it's
unlimited so there's this I think of it
as like unlimited intelligence and that
is is out there and our scientific
theories will will get
huge and far more interesting and far
more complex and covered lots and lots
they'll cover will be blown away we'll
make lots and lots of progress and but
girdles incompleteness theorem says but
you will have not even begun to scratch
the surface of the unlimited
intelligence that's out there
so I'm not I'm not by the way
some people say well Hoffman you're
you're you've walked away from modernism
in the in the desire for logic and truth
and rationality you've gone into
post-modernism and and uh you know
and my attitude is no no no
reason
is telling us
its limits reason is saying that logic
itself cannot get to all truths so I'm
paying
due respect to reason because reason
itself is saying its own limits and in
fact that gives me even more respect for
reason because reason is smart enough to
tell us where it gets off
so it's not abandoning reason it's not
going into you know
some postmodernism kind of thing where
anything goes no not anything goes
reason is saying yeah use your logical
systems but your logical systems must of
course be internally consistent so
girdles
theorem is not girdles in inconsistency
theorem as girdle's incompleteness there
our logic can be consistent if it is
consistent then it's necessarily
incomplete if it's if it were
inconsistent then it's
mostly useless right it'd be mostly
useless so is girdles so what girdle
really showed is our our theories are
either inconsistent
or incomplete but we call it girdle's
incompleteness theorem because
that's we don't think about
inconsistency it's really the
incompleteness and so so it's truly
respecting reason
to recognize that reason itself says
where it gets off and it points to as
Newton pointed to this unbounded
intelligence that reason can always
happily explore
fully knowing
it will always be a trivial
foray into the unknown a trivial foray
into the unknown and yet somehow it's
important for us to do that foray
so so as a scientist this is not just
abstract stuff for me
I take it I take reason very seriously
it says
I have limits and there are unbounded
truths Beyond Reason so I take time to
just sit in complete silence and let go
of reason
and see what happens
maybe I'm I can touch that unlimited
intelligence maybe I am that unlimited
intelligence under a headset
that's an interesting possibility which
many spiritual Traditions have pointed
to that we are that unlimited
intelligence so that we then have this
interesting back and forth between
rigorous logic not anything goes
rigorous Logic on the one hand and then
complete letting go of all Concepts
going into complete silence
where there's this incredible
intelligence that's it's literally
infinitely greater than our scientific
intelligence
and having them go back and forth I
think the the best science in the future
will be from those who can do that
be absolutely hard-nosed in your math
and your experiments absolutely
hard-nosed it's not everything goes it's
it's rigor and then go into complete
interior silence
to get the truth to tap in to this
unlimited wisdom unlimited intelligence
and go back and forth somehow my feeling
is that's what all this is pointing to
that that we should have our feet in
both Realms and for some reason having
feet in both Realms is really
what we're up to what this is all about
okay so let's push into that a little
bit so this takes us into consciousness
never been enamored with the
Consciousness debate but
the way that you propose some
interesting ways of looking at it I do
find intriguing
so you've got this idea that
girdle's incompleteness theorem says
that it's this infinite thing and that
there's always going to be more to
explore that you will never be able to
have a theory of everything and when you
ask yourself
why would this be the case or
um how does that tie into consciousness
and maybe I'm getting the slightly wrong
but my interpretation of what you said
is that it's possible that given that
Consciousness is basically exploring
itself and we are all of the
permutations that it must run through to
basically have the negative take I know
that not to be me and that helps me
understand who I am
how close am I getting that's that's I
think a very very good first
approximation with the Proviso
that we understand now based on what
we've talked about girdles in
completeness theorem that everything
that we are saying now
are just words
and they're only pointers into a realm
that's that's unlimited and
infinitely beyond anything that even our
words can point to so even when I've
used so I talk about Consciousness as
being more fundamental than space-time
but even then if I step back and go okay
to be really consistent I have to admit
that even a theory of Consciousness is
not a Theory of Everything
and it may not even be the right
language
it's just the next baby step
in our scientific Consciousness be more
fundamental than space-time wouldn't the
thing that the guys the local realism
which requires you to look at something
state that if Consciousness were more
fundamental than space-time it would
already be observing itself
so
the way to think about it is maybe an
analogy is you're wearing a headset yep
and you're playing Grand Theft Auto
again
but there is no real car out there
the steering wheel is just in your head
it's all in your perceptions
all of that is so the entire
physical world quote unquote of Grand
Theft Auto is made up in your mind made
up in your Consciousness so my my
Consciousness or whatever Consciousness
is is creating the
um
the virtual world that's right the way I
think about it
um and again you know words have
limitations but
the math model we're working on on
Consciousness indicates that there is
one
unlimited Consciousness that cannot be
modeled
and but we can talk about projections of
it
that one that one big Consciousness can
be can have projections
and we're having a projection into a 4D
space-time format
and there's a Tom projection and a
non-projection but we're just
projections of this one unlimited
Consciousness that's that's utterly
outside of space and time and this is
probably not a particularly
sophisticated projection as I was saying
40 space time only goes to 10 to the
minus 33 centimeters pretty trivial so
this is we're probably this is you know
Consciousness not being too serious this
is like a trivial projection but it's
doing whatever it needs to do we're
doing some science we're talking we're
learning to love each other which maybe
you know who knows that might be the big
thing maybe maybe it's learning
to know yourself Beyond any concepts and
to know that everybody else is really
you under a different Avatar and to to
learn to love I mean I I don't know what
the final answer is but this is the kind
of question that comes up and the kind
of answer that comes up that feels a
little bit
wishful thinking isn't the right way but
that feels like a very
specific to you prognostication
absolutely on the math yeah when I hear
you describing that I think of War games
and Jacob learning like oh there's no
way to win a thermonuclear war the only
way to win is to not play great ending
to a movie but like when I think about
okay wait why would
why would Consciousness this Grand
Consciousness that the math seems to
point to
why would it need to understand itself
why would it
need to discover love it's like and I
think about this a lot and we talked
about this in the last
um the last time we were together
I was saying when you've got a machine
and you're trying to like get AI to do
something you have to give it directives
you have to tell it to do something
but somebody had to tell it to do that
thing so who is telling Consciousness oh
you should care about love
well and I I completely agree with you
Tom I think that the things I just threw
out
should probably be thrown out right but
the idea is we don't have good ideas in
this space so the reason I'm so when I
put these ideas out I'm not wedded to
them in the least but I'm saying better
to have something on the table that we
can say Ah that's not it then have
nothing on the table because at least we
can say okay that's not it but but so
why isn't that it what's wrong with that
and then we can try to to play with and
say well how can we get something better
so I put some bad pieces on the table
because I don't have anything better so
it's Poverty of my imagination but I'm
hoping about putting bad pieces on the
table having people go no that's not it
I would go yeah that's not it so what is
it what what is a better idea but of
course that's a never-ending process
girdle tells us
that in some sense will always be
putting bad pieces on the table
[Music]
and that's so we have to learn to live
with that we have to learn to say I'm
not going to get the final Theory of
Everything no matter even if you're an
Einstein which you put down on the table
we're eventually going to say here's the
limits of that and that's going to be
always the case with scientific theories
it's just that in the things I just
threw on the table the limits are so
obvious and so clear that you can just
sort of say right away that that doesn't
seem right and I had a nice lunch a few
days ago with Annika Harris and while I
was putting these ideas and she had the
exactly the same attitude which is she
said it sounds too romantic Don and I
agree but it's better to put something
on the table and get a negative reaction
so that we start to say okay well what
are better places to to go right in this
but always realize that girdle is
telling us this very humbling thing
you'll never get a theory of everything
and that means there'll always be the
feeling of yeah but there's more yeah
but there's more even if you're Einstein
yeah but there's more
so Consciousness what one I want to
understand as we look at that recent
Nobel prize winning for realizing that
local reality isn't a thing
if there is this Uber consciousness
how would it not cause the like constant
collapsing if if Consciousness is more
fundamental than space-time how is it
not causing this constant collapse down
to being observed because if
Consciousness is is the thing that gives
rise to that it would by Nature be aware
right so to really give a technical
answer to that what we're going to have
to have is a mathematical theory of
consciousness
first right so what do we mean by
Consciousness and write down equations
for how it is Dynamics
and then we're going to have to say
where is consciousness is it inside
Space time see most of my colleagues who
are studying Consciousness my cognitive
Neuroscience these are brilliant
brilliant researchers and Friends
but their thinking of Consciousness as
inside space-time is being made by the
brain or being made by an AI computer
that's complicated enough or made by
integrated information or microtubule
Quantum collapses or or Global workspace
kind of architectures on the right
broadcast architecture there so there's
something inside space-time that's
generating consciousness
so that's the I would say 99 of my
colleagues and friends um and then and
by the way they're brilliant but they're
thinking inside space-time that's almost
all the work is inside space-time and
Consciousness is stuck inside space-time
I'm saying we need a theory of
Consciousness outside space-time because
our best science tells us that
space-time is a trivial data structure
it's a shallow trivial data structure
why should we try to shoehorn
Consciousness to be something inside
space-time
why not think about
again the VR case with my headset all
that I'm perceiving is actually not
really there it's actually in my
Consciousness let's turn things around
space-time and particles in the physical
world is just a little tiny data
structure inside consciousness so to
have that kind of model so Consciousness
is fundamental
Consciousness then uses tiny little
headsets
in its interactions with itself and
space-time is just one trivial little
headset that conscious agents use to
interact with and and probably has far
more interesting ones than than
space-time
so to answer your question we then
really have to say our mathematical
model of Consciousness and how does that
precisely
project into our little space-time
headset and give us the laws of quantum
field Theory the laws of general
relativity
evolution by natural selection we have
to get so all the stuff that we've done
inside the headset science has been
inside the headset until the last couple
decades all of our science has been
studying the pixels in our headset and
the structure of our pixel
with the amplitohedron
science is taking a step outside the
headset and saying what is beyond space
and time okay so that's really
incredible so and then they say the
deepest thing we found are these
decorated permutations that's the
deepest thing we've found so far it
doesn't mean it's the final answer it's
just as far as we've gotten so what we
need to do is take a theory of conscious
Consciousness we call it conscious
agents in my case or conscious units
Annika likes me to use conscious units
instead of conscious agents because
agency involves maybe the notion of a
self and there doesn't have to be a
notion of a you know like a human kind
of Self in these agents they could be
selfless in some sense but conscious how
well so my myself is I mean don't most
people define consciousness as it is
like something to be you right the self
though is like I'm Don Hoffman I was
born in such a year my parents were such
and such I got educated it's a story
yeah but in some sense if I just let go
of the story if I forgotten my story I
would still be conscious
if I forget who I if I forget everything
that I've done
give me a little drug and I just see if
it's an experience I'm still I'm still
I'm still conscious and so the self in
terms of a little story and and what's
interesting is we put so much emphasis
in the story and and me versus you and
I've got more than you or I'm smarter
than you or or I'm faster than you and
even little kids you know my car is
faster my daddy can beat up here yeah
that kind of thing so we're always
comparing our stories so so there's no
self in these conscious agents in the
sense of this little image of myself
that I'm defending and showing that it's
better than yours and daddy or your car
whatever it might be
so so I call them conscious agents but
we could call them conscious units but
the key thing is that that has to be
mathematically precise even though we
understand that our mathematics will
always be just our current baby step but
nevertheless you need to be
mathematically precise and we have to
show precisely a mapping into space-time
then we can start to answer your
question about how is this local realism
thing related to properties of
Consciousness now the reason we have to
map in space-time is because we know
that space time even if it's just a sort
of cheap simulation it does come from
whatever is more foundational than that
and that's where all our data is the
only place our headset lets us look is
inside the headset so we have to I mean
if we're going to do experiments to test
our theories we're stuck with this
little tiny trivial data structure
called space time and all of our
experiments have to be done in
space-time we have to measure them
inside Space time so that's why we have
to take our Theory Of Consciousness and
project it into space-time
now what's interesting is that the
physicists have gone beyond space-time
and found these monoliths as we talked
about the monolith the sitting there the
manplutahedron and so forth and then the
decorated permutation monolith but no
Dynamics
so the physicists
are going to eventually want a Dynamics
right why if you have no space and time
why would something need to move now
physicists like Nema I mean I'll put it
on campus if I were the physics
assistant said you know what
Here's the final answer it's the
amplitohedron and a decorative
permutation live with it that's all
there is and some 20 year old kid taking
a graduate class will go give me a break
you want me to just live with that I'm
going to look deeper I'm going to probe
deeper I'm going to find something
behind that and that's that's what
science always does so we're not so no
none of the physicists I mean they're of
course we have a big party and are
really happy about the amplitude and The
Decorator it's an incredible
accomplishment
but the attitude is going to be what's
next
and in in principle they're going to
want a Dynamics not a not time so you
can have Dynamics without what we call
time as in space-time so the notion of
Dynamics or sequence is a far more
General notion than just the notion of
time as we see it in in terms of
space-time so we want a Dynamics in that
more General sense of something
where there are sequences where there
are it's not just a static object
because there are things that we see in
our headset of space-time that leads us
to believe that sequencing is must be a
part of whatever is fundamental
well
possibly yes that and possibly because
um we I think would be impatient
or unhappy with a theory that just says
God said this object and that's it there
is this object live with it that's the
that's the final answer
no scientist would be happy with that
why did God say that why couldn't a God
said something else and and why did why
did it have to be static why couldn't
there be some Dynamics not a space-time
Dynamics but some kind of
something happening why why can't so now
the answer may be that the geometry is
all there is and there is no Dynamics
but we're not going to just accept that
at face value we're going to have to be
taken there kicking and screaming right
and made you know to to believe that
because nothing else works
but
so that's why I think that the
physicists themselves are going to look
for Dynamics behind the decorative
permutations
so what a theory of Consciousness has to
do then if it wants to connect with
space-time is it just to show how it
maps onto decorative permutations right
you need a dynamical theory of
Consciousness and you must show how it
Maps into decorated permutations then
the physicists say if you give me the
decorative permutations I can take you
all the way into space time and you can
predict scattering at the Large Hadron
Collider and so forth and so that's what
what our team has just done in the last
10 weeks we we discovered a new bit of
mathematics that um the Dynamics of
conscious agents is so-called Markov
chains markovian Dynamics a very very
simple kind of probabilistic Dynamics
and
so a few weeks ago a few a couple months
ago we decided to look
okay how do you map Markov chains into
decorated permutations so we could put a
Dynamics behind the amplitude heater
and
as far as like we could tell there's
nothing published in terms of a general
theory there are special little cases
where they've looked at something but
you know a general theory take any
Markov chain map it into decorative
Markov chain is just the long tail
knock-on effect of things bumping into
each other essentially right just
probabilistic you know this this happens
with that probability this happens with
that probability all the probabilities
have to sum to one what are the
probability of when the cue ball hits
the the balls on the pool table that
they will end up in this configuration
that's right in the case of conscious
agents I should be explicit it's like
the it's a social network right this is
now consciously so it's a network of
agents and it in some sense that the
probabilities are what's the probability
that this guy is going to talk to that
guy
or or these three guys or those five
guys and so it's it's sort of like
Network linkage Google has a lot of
links a lot more than Hoffman so Google
has a lot of a lot of things that are
that are talking to Google Hoffman has a
very few things apple has a lot of
things talking to them so and those so
those probabilities are sort of saying
it's Network probabilities what's the
probability that that sometimes it's
your influencing too as well Google has
huge influence because of all the
networks all the connections it's got
much more than someone who only has five
followers right Google has millions or
hundreds of millions so
so those so and and then there's you
know if you think about it someone
tweets and then that gets picked up and
who picks it up and who retweets it and
who likes it and so forth so you see all
the it's all probabilities right
someone does something and it ripples
through the whole network
probabilistically you can't know exactly
you know even though Tom is a follower
of somebody else doesn't mean that Tom's
going to Tweet everything what does Tom
like what what or maybe Tom just missed
that I mean he was he you know he had
something else that day so it's all
probabilistic and so you you see these
evolving probabilities on this network
and that's what Markov chains are really
good at they're looking at literally so
the theory of conscious agents think
social networks like Twitter reverse and
so forth and how influences propagate in
the twitterverse and and then so what we
found about 10 weeks ago was We Invented
apparently as for as far as we can tell
new math
uh like a precise way to take any
markovian Dynamics and map it into
decorated permutations
so that we now have a map from the
Dynamics of conscious agents into
decorative permutations the physicists
then and decorated permutations for
people that don't know is the shuffling
but it's shuffling that can go either
direction so I have the good fortune
that you were explaining this to me
before we started rolling I don't want
people to think that I'm more clever
than I am uh but decorated permutations
you said okay when people think about
shuffling a deck they think about card
one going into the third position they
don't think about card one going if
there's five cards going the other way
so instead of going one two and ending
up at three it goes five four and ending
up at 3. so same number of moves but
you've gone in a different direction and
am I explaining that right yeah but the
idea of the two different directions is
important but it's slightly just a
slight difference so suppose I have five
cards just one two three four five yep
um and they're in order and now I'm
going to shuffle them and I say okay one
went to position three now
but five went to position two
so one going to three is sort of
shuffling forward right you go into a
bigger number five going to two you're
going to a smaller number you're going
backward so so that a normal permutation
that's that's fine that's what a normal
permutation is now decorated permutation
says you only Shuffle to a bigger number
so if you want 5 to go to 2 what you're
going to do is you're going to have 5 go
to
because 7 minus 5 5 is the biggest
number 7 minus 5 is 2.
okay but if 5 if 5 had gone to one then
then we'd actually go 5 goes to 6
because 6 minus five is one so you it's
a wrap around so only so if you already
if one is going to three then you just
do the normal thing 1 goes to three but
if some permutation is going to a
smaller number like 3 goes to 1
then you actually have to say three goes
to six because because a total of five
and five plus one is six
so that's called a decorated permutation
so it's it's not it's just a permutation
with this extra little twist it's not a
big deal frankly it just turned out that
you needed that extra twist to fully
capture the particle physics scattering
of particles so when you do that what's
what's stunning is
for some cases so in the approximation
in which all particles are super
symmetric
and massless
so they have so they're all traveling in
the speed of light they're massless so
they travel the Speedline in that
simple case the decorated permutation is
everything
that's it
and when when you let go of super
Symmetry and you have massive particles
then all you have to do is you have the
decorated permutation plus you need to
add information about the mass and the
spin but the decorated permutation is
really doing the heavy lifting so that's
the stunning thing is to the physicists
which is
and and you see it in the writings when
you when you read like like Neymar
County Hamed has the book you know
grossmanian geometry of scattering
amplitudes with a bunch of
when they talk about the decorative
permutation so you can see in the way
they write they're like who ordered this
I mean I you would never have you
guessed that it would be something like
that so but here's an interesting thing
it turns out that decorative
permutations are the most compact way to
capture a markovian Dynamics it's a
incredibly compact way of capturing the
Dynamics it basically is telling you
what what decorative permutations in a
dynamical system are telling you is your
social network
who are you connected to who are you
interacting only shuffling in One
Direction
you better capture you better capture
that like if you want to go into the
details
it's so foreign to me I don't know how
much the details but that's really
strange so that's where we get into the
math fair enough I'll accept it as true
um we can do the math if you want but
but
the last time that we did the math that
actually ended up being really
fascinating so let's try it let's see
let's see how far we get before my brain
snaps in half okay so the key thing
about these decorated permutations that
gives them this extra power yep is that
there's two ways to map to yourself
right so if if you Shuffle the cards but
card number one stays number one then
one goes to one right
but with the decorated permutation you
could say well if they were say five
cards then you could say well one goes
to one but also one goes to six is
another way of saying that you stayed
yourself because if six Mod Five is one
six minus five is one yep so there are
so so-called what happens if I want to
move five to position four that's really
nine and you said that seven was the max
so oh no so the the max would be ten
okay right got it got it got it so if
you have five cards the maximum number
would be ten for n cards it's 2N right
right understood so so for five so for
five cards five could either map to
itself five to five or five goes to ten
yep because that would be so the one is
called the first decoration of of the
identity
because it's the identity move five went
to five and the other is called the
second Declaration of the identity and
and there's another branch of
mathematics where they're called loops
and code Loops um but anyway what so the
way it matters in terms of the physics
now in in physics when you have the
first Declaration of the identity it
corresponds to what they call a Zero
Dimensional space
so in some sense the thing doesn't exist
it's a zero demand and when it maps to
itself
in the second
kind of identity then it's it's all in
one-dimensional space it's a separate
one-dimensional space
so it
the reason for the the decorate
permutation is to capture that
distinction between something that is
alone in the sense that um it's
essentially empty versus a loan in the
sense that it's just a one-dimensional
space a line versus just a Zero
Dimensional point you needed to capture
those two things and so so it does but
for the Markov Dynamics it captures
something about social networks that's
interesting
um either
I'm alone I'm the identity I'm alone
because I'm I'm talking to myself
and so I'm only talking to myself or I'm
alone because I'm not even talking to
myself
and so the case in which I'm not even
talking to myself is the first
Declaration of the identity and the one
in which I'm only talking to myself and
nobody else that's the second and as
soon as I'm talking to anybody else then
I get a non-trivial permutation and that
then what you do is you assign if say
I'm I'm in The Social Network and I'm
number two
and suppose that my decorated
permutation assigns me to five there's
only five memory that means that um
my social network everybody in my social
network is captured between two and five
total so for example number one is not
in my social network
yep right so so what the decorated
permutation for dynamical system is
doing is it's capturing now now it could
be that for example when I go two to
five
um maybe four isn't in my network but
but I'm not going to worry about that
I'm just going to say everybody that's
in my network is captured between two
and five inclusive of two and five
and when you look at the whole decorated
permutation you'll figure out that four
wasn't in the social network of two you
can figure it out from the decorated
permutation so that's why it's such that
it's a really
um compact representation of everything
so
So eventually we may actually use this
on social network they are our our new
mathematics of decorated permutations
for Dynamics may actually end up being a
very compact representation of social
networks I haven't even thought about
that yet but that could be as you're
explaining it I was like are they going
to run this math for predictive models
for social networking well it's it is
the right now the most compact
mathematics that we can use to describe
social networks
and the Dynamics of social networks
basically dynamics of who are you
actually interacting with so so this is
a brand new tool that I you know has
never been as far as I know I'm used we
invented it so we have a paper that
we're about to submit for publication in
two or three weeks where we present this
and I did give a professional talk at
Stanford
um a month or two ago um where I
presented the math I know how people put
this [__] together like this is so
abstract for me I am Clinging On by my
fingernails and I would not want to have
to explain decorated permutations to
anybody right uh but that's really
interesting that I mean so we're caught
in between two things one talking about
the things we can predict and how
utterly fascinating it is when you can
actually map out this is what happens
right and then talking about how oh yeah
everything that you're mapping is
totally fake it's uh it's really
interesting but that's one of the things
that I've always I I cognitively uh I I
don't have that ability it doesn't come
naturally to me me either like I have to
loop around the stuff so many times just
to get like the real Basics but the idea
of being able to understand a system so
well that you can predict this goes back
to what I was saying my my whole thing
in life is when you can accurately
predict the outcome of your actions
things get very interesting and so
anything I mean that like gets as of
right now I can't digest that enough to
make it usable in my life but it hints
at this idea of you really can map out
if I do this this and this even as it
gets more and more complicated you
really can predict what the outcome is
going to be and the closer that you can
get to that the more effective you will
be in your life
especially because so much of what one
does in business it's all human
psychology and so if you have a way I
mean and this really gets into right now
impact theory is investing hugely into
Ai Ai and what we're doing in terms of
our funnels AI in terms of what we're
doing in the gaming side and
acknowledging that even though you have
a wall of data that as a person you
can't work your way through there really
is there are patterns in that data oh
yes that are highly leverageable
and in fact one of the things like as as
you're talking and I don't think you
share my obsession with this but you
might
my obsession with physics is getting
people to understand that when Einstein
wrote down his general relativity and
special relativity it gave us the modern
world in ways that I don't think people
fully understand from
um being able to zoom to GPS to
um atomic energy I mean it's really
spectacular once you're able to better
understand the nature of reality you can
do things with that because it makes
predictions I can't remember if we were
talking about that before or after we
started rolling
but that ability to oh that theory makes
this prediction and you can begin to
think in novel ways and so I for a while
I was teaching a course that I called
business decision making it's the worst
[__] title ever nobody knows what
that means but it actually is the only
thing in business that matters you have
to be able to go should I do this should
I not do this what will happen if I
interpret the world this way versus that
way and people that Succeed in Business
they get very good at knowing how to
Think Through the problem to Think
Through the problem you have to
understand the nature of things and so
my whole thing was hey are you doing
social media you better understand the
nature of social media what's the nature
of social media it's human psychology
plus the algorithm and so like if you
master both now you can really do
something right
the problem is that both of those data
sets are so massive right that you're
really taking your best swag and getting
into this stuff is for me if we really
can
peel through the the headset and start
getting into no no that all these things
that's a really low fidelity thing
and this will scare people but as you if
you're the first person to poke through
that right oh my God you have I mean not
to take the dark example but I mean we
ended World War II by being the first to
understand atomic energy and how to
split the atom
they're way more uplifting and positive
examples but that's just the one that
will stick out in everybody's
Consciousness but being able to
in fact this is something that I don't
know if you know Eric um Weinstein but
talking to him
he's looking at okay what's that next
breakthrough and what's it going to let
us predict and so that's his whole like
obsession is we've got people playing at
very high levels and if he's right and
he understands something that other
people don't understand it's going to
make predictions and we don't know where
those predictions go right they could be
good they could be terrifying could be
life-changing in a good way in a bad way
but getting people to understand like
you need to be obsessed at at least at
the headset level you have to be
obsessed with better predicting what all
this means
so anyways you're talking about
decorated permutations and stuff it just
gets me thinking about large data sets
how we simplify that what that's going
to mean in my world in terms of business
intelligence
identifying an audience understanding
what will convert it
it really matters like it it plays out
in a really real way it does and I think
a metaphor here might illustrate how big
the potential is
science
of space-time
has been all in the headset and we've
become wizards of the headset just like
someone in Grand Theft Auto has become a
wizard using the steering wheel and the
gas to go through the space-time of the
you know Grand Theft Auto virtual world
but suppose that you learned to think
outside the headset
you actually understand the software in
the supercomputer that's running it
then you can take the gas out of the
tank of the wizard you can give him flat
tires or her flat tires you can change
the geometry of the roads in other words
the wizard is trivial
compared to what you can do once you
have learned how the headset works so
science has just taken its first baby
sips outside of the headset just in the
last
20 years we're taking our first babysit
once we start to understand the first
level of software that's available to us
I'm saying we're going to get the whole
thing I mean I've girdles incompleteness
theorem says
the software is endless
but
the way things seem to work is you do
get to see layer by layer by layer so as
we go to the first layer of the software
the Wizardry inside Space time is going
to look trivial compared so right now
for example
something like 97 of the galaxies that
we can see
we could never go to they're moving away
from us faster than the speed of light
not because they're moving through space
faster than the speed of light they're
not but space itself is expanding so
quickly that if we move through space to
try to get to them the space would be
expanding so fast that we couldn't get
to them at the speed of light and so
there's 90 97 of the real estate in our
universe is waving at us saying hi you
can never come see me yeah that's
fascinating especially because if space
can expand faster than the speed of
light this is more at least in my
limited mind pointing at like something
deeper yeah there's something else going
on
but what if we didn't have to go through
space to get to Alpha Centauri yeah
every time you say this it turns me on
like this is so that's that's the
exciting this is where I'm I'm really
excited this is one reason why I'd like
to understand
our theory of conscious agents outside
right I'm not saying the theory of
conscious agents is right but it's the
first baby step that I've seen where
it's a dynamical system
where you can actually talk about quote
unquote software that you could Tinker
with you could actually do something
with it
um that would allow us perhaps new
technologies where we don't go through
space to the Andromeda galaxy that would
take us
about 2.4 million years
good luck even your great great
grandkids wouldn't be alive but what if
we could go around space because our
headset is just a headset you don't need
you can just change the software oh you
want to be at Alpha Centauri or
Andromeda just change the software now
you're there
because you realize that space time
isn't the reality
it's just a data structure you can play
with the data structure as soon as we
the Next Generation my generation won't
get it
the Next Generation that really gets it
is going to unleash Miracles because we
will then start to really get the
software behind space-time we will begin
to Tinker with it and it's going the
possibilities are endless I can't even
imagine
speaking of imagining ground me back in
how you think about this in your real
life so I know that you got clobbered by
covid yeah you wrote A Goodbye text to
your wife I'm assuming because it was
coveted and she couldn't come in the
room because this was really early right
how did that influence that moment for
you
well like were you just like oh it's all
I had said who cares bye babe yeah I
wish I could say you know I'm this
really enlightened guy in the science
and spirituality and then so I was just
really calm and I wish I could say that
but but uh you know I was in tremendous
pain my heart had been pounding the
arrhythmia and cardiac um
a rhythmia 190 beats per minute 180
beats per minute for 36 hours she's uh I
I knew that my heart couldn't do that
much longer and they hadn't been able to
figure out a way to stop it and so like
four o'clock in the morning my wife was
asleep but but I didn't know that I
would make it until she was awake so I I
text her I knew I wouldn't wake her up
she has her thing on me but I at least
want to give her a goodbye text because
I figured by the time she was up I
wouldn't I wouldn't be alive and
after I did the text you know within an
hour after that
um so they found a drug that
called my heart down and was able to
keep my heart
calm long enough so I could eventually
get a surgery which then cured the
problem so so I you know what'd you put
in the text you don't have to give me
verbatim obviously that's super private
but like what was the gist well you know
when you're
feeling that bad you you I didn't have
to wear with all to say much it just
said I I don't you know said sweetheart
I don't think I'm gonna make it I love
you and that was it right that's I just
that was all I had so there was there
wasn't
um
so I can imagine someone who's really
spiritually Adept and advanced might sit
there and very calmly
that wasn't me that was I was
completely shattered
well I've been awake for
48 hours with a heart beating at 180
beats per minute for 36 hours I I was
I was done and and I was scared and I
was lonely and I was afraid and I missed
my wife and my daughter and my grandkids
and and it was
um so so I have no Illusions about you
know being some kind of spiritual master
who is you know above it all uh you know
I'm just another human being with the
same problems with everybody else these
are really good ideas I think are
helping me to get a bigger picture but
when it comes right down to it when push
comes to shove there's something inside
me that believes that space-time is
fundamental
it believes that when the body dies
that's it so it's really interesting I
I'm not
coherent
there's there's well put it this way
maybe intellectually I'm coherent about
this but there's an emotional side of me
that hasn't come along
now I am meditating and I think that
slowly the emotional side of me is
unraveling that that
type scared little child that's inside
of me
that thinks this is all of it and is
afraid of dying and so forth it's slowly
unraveling I don't know if it'll ever
completely unravel I I I hear people
that I have no reason to disbelieve
who say that they've completely
unraveled it and they're completely
unafraid of death I believe that that's
possible
um but I'm not enlightened
um yeah so that was my experience it was
sobering but one thing that comes out of
it is I um
when I stop and reflect I'm grateful for
each day because I didn't expect to have
any of these days
I didn't I mean we discovered the stuff
about decorated permutations since then
I'm so grateful to be alive for the fun
of
you know seeing this decorating that's
really neat and of course things have
happened with my grandkids that are fun
and so everything is a delight and a
I don't take it for granted and if I
were to face death in the same way again
I probably feel afraid and scared and
and so forth um so what do you think
happens when we die
my my best guess is we just take a
headset off that that implies like a
keeping of the personality no and it
doesn't it to me it suggests that the
whole story I was born in such and such
a year at such and such a city in such a
such hospital my parents did this I did
that I had that whole story maybe
something that you say goodbye to so
cognition itself is headset
that's right or awareness
pure awareness so awareness and
Consciousness are different yeah so well
um
there's a distinction to be made and I'm
not going to be sort of hard-nosed about
the particular words but you could have
a specific conscious experience like the
experience of green
but you could and that would be
conscious a kind of conscious experience
that would be a kind of a Consciousness
but you could also talk about awareness
without any content at all I'm just
aware
of awareness but even that's saying too
much I'm just aware
so I'm not aware of dawn I'm not aware
of
where I live not where I'm just I'm just
aware
and
when when people meditate and they go
into very very deep levels of meditation
where they really let go of all thoughts
then in some sense
yourself dies well is dead I mean there
is no Dawn there is no I did this degree
there is no I have these that's gone
and and yet
in some sense some nothing essential is
gone nothing essential left
that's just a story
the essential thing is the the awareness
and the the real Joy
of being is the awareness itself
the story is a nice add-on it's icing on
the cake but it's not essential the real
deep Joy is
comes from the pure awareness with with
no content whatsoever and so in that
sense I I think of but but see
there's part of me that is tied to the
story
so that was the part that was scared to
death in the hospital there's another
part of me that that believes and knows
that
everything's fine I'm awareness without
content
that's what I really am at my deepest
level but as long as I'm still clinging
to the story of Don
then that is going to die when I die
if I don't choose to die to it while I
can choose to die to it I will be forced
to die to it when my body dies and so so
there are some of spiritual teachers
like Eckhart Tolle who says in some
sense I'm already dead
the only thing left is the body so that
I'm not there I'm but but I I don't
disbelieve I mean I just believe most of
them but I don't disbelieve some of them
right I I think that it is possible in
in the case for example of Eckhart Tolle
I think it's highly probable that he's
right I mean he really has let go and
he's utterly Fearless about death
you know and I'm not
but I understand in principle
why that could be if I really am not the
story and I've really let go of the
story of dawn and I'm no longer
identified so here's how to know if
you've really let go of the story
am I competing with anybody
is it important to me to be
better than someone
to be better known to have a better
whatever be smarter have a better degree
whatever it might be as long as I'm
comparing myself with anybody else and
trying you know or saying I'm worse I
feel inferior
as long as that's going on to me then
I'm tied to my story and I'll be afraid
of death it's only when I don't care
about comparisons anymore that I've
really truly let go so so if someone
cuts me off on the road when I'm driving
if I'm upset about that
I'm tied to my story
that means I'm not ready to die so you
can just so when you look at the thing
whatever disturbs you
tells you that's that's the the hint
okay you're
still tied to the Apron Strings the baby
story I'm Don I was born here I'm
struggling to be important because I
have such a small I mean I'm such this
small little thing I'm I'm a little guy
inside space-time
I'm I believe that the Avatar of me in
this headset is everything that I am I'm
clinging to my avatar
and as long as I'm clinging to it the
possibility of losing that Avatar is
terrifying so no so I'm there I'm not
enlightened I'm I understand this
intellectually there's something
emotional that has to
be brought along it has to be healed or
something like that it's got to be
brought along so but but this is it all
makes it's all a good intellectual story
for me and I'm meditating to have it
become a true personal story
but but
what it ends up being is that even you
think about even your body
is just an icon it's not who you are if
this if what we're saying is right
space-time is doomed if the physicist is
Right space-time is doomed evolution is
right this is just a headset
this is just an avatar
then
I don't even have brains right now if
you look you'll render brains
but right now I have no brains because
they're not being rendered so neural
activity causes none of my behavior
brains cause none of our behavior and
yet we need to study Neuroscience we
need more money for Neuroscience because
that's the part of our interface
that is most informative about the
software behind space time
so if we want to understand the software
behind space-time we're going to have to
study the complex thing that we call the
brain which is just the projection of
this deeper software that is the best
projection we've got so Neuroscience is
far more complicated
than we're thinking right now we see
neurons we think there are neurons no no
no we see neurons that's a pointer to a
realm far more complicated probably
infinitely more complicated but
fortunately we can look at it in steps
so so we need more for neurals so I
don't have any brains
but we need to study brains because when
we render our brains in our headset
that's the most information we're going
to have
in our headset about the software behind
space time
so but still emotionally
you
we're tied to it I'm tied to it
um and we're wired up to this way so
Piaget a very famous um
child psychologist
had talked about what he called object
permanence he said that you know we're
wired
to at a certain stage of our life
believe that
this
object exists and will continue to exist
even if no one looks
object permanence and you know he had
the example of
18 month old baby a 17 month old baby
you take a doll
put it behind a pillow and the baby acts
as though the doll no longer exists but
at a certain age you put the baby the
the doll behind the pillow now the baby
will crawl over and try to get it okay
so now it's got object permanence so the
later studies showed that it came much
earlier than Piaget thought maybe even
three or four months so so why is it
that I have a hard time thinking of my
body as an avatar
as opposed to a real object that exists
why am I having our well
um it's because I didn't choose to
believe that I was wired up to believe
that before I even had reason so when we
believe very very strongly that these
things exist it's not because we came to
a rational conclusion about that oh yeah
I thought it through and I know no no no
you believe that when you were four
months old that's why you believe it and
and it's no deeper than that you never
we've just never challenged it that's
the glory of science it goes back it can
challenge things that we believe since
we were three months old and it can show
us that we were wrong that's the power
of Science and then the power of
Sciences also to tell us
the limits of science
because what science tells us with
girdles and completeness Theorem is
there is no Theory of Everything
but that doesn't mean that we should
just do whatever we wish and think
what random thoughts we want no there is
we're rewarded by thinking precisely
and also humbly precisely to get as far
as our current framework will go and
then humbly to realize that it's just a
framework and there's a new one Beyond
but that will also be rigorous and that
will also be rigorous so it's really
it's not going into you know just
whatever you want you know it's it's not
like a post-modernist kind of and again
I don't want to give a a wrong
impression I think there's a lot of
interesting people that have done really
brilliant work in post-modernism but but
the the I'll put it this way the
the gist of it that some people get that
do whatever you want doesn't matter
logic doesn't really require I think
that that's just plain wrong I really
like reason because it tells the limits
of itself
I love that where can people follow you
uh I have a Twitter
Donald D Hoffman so
d-o-n-a-l-d-d-h-o-f-f-m-a-n
um and you know that's my Twitter handle
and and I usually every time I have a
talk I'll I'll post a link to it a new
paper
I'll post a link or a new article that I
think is really interesting on this
stuff I'll post a link again it's a
great feed I've definitely enjoyed it oh
yeah look great for sure and speaking of
things you guys will enjoy if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care peace if you want to 10x your
productivity click right here to learn
how to have near Infinite Energy I am
here with Todd Herman Tom it is it's the
time it's the Tom and Todd show today it
is indeed it is indeed welcome man yeah
great to be here finally super excited
to have you